                    FR ATC
                     SC
                      OM H
                        R
BUILD A




Sebastian Raschka




     MANNING
                                                                                           Fine-tunes the pretrained
                                                                                           LLM to create a
                                                                                           classification model

                STAGE 1                                                   STAGE 2                                         STAGE 3
                                                                                                                     Dataset with class labels
  1) Data                                                                               7) Load
                 2) Attention     3) LLM                    5) Training    6) Model
preparation                                                                            pretrained
                 mechanism      architecture                    loop      evaluation                8) Fine-tuning
& sampling                                                                              weights

                                                                                                                            Classifier
                                           4) Pretraining
              Building an LLM                                        Foundation model


                                                                                                                      Personal assistant

Implements the data sampling and                     Pretrains the LLM on unlabeled                 9) Fine-tuning
understand the basic mechanism                       data to obtain a foundation                                        Instruction dataset
                                                     model for further fine-tuning

                                                                                           Fine-tunes the pretrained
                                                                                           LLM to create a personal
                                                                                           assistant or chat model

The three main stages of coding a large language model (LLM) are implementing the LLM architecture and data
preparation process (stage 1), pretraining an LLM to create a foundation model (stage 2), and fine-tuning the
foundation model to become a personal assistant or text classifier (stage 3). Each of these stages is explored
and implemented in this book.




                            Licensed to Christopher Funderburk <cmfunderburk@gmail.com>
Build a Large Language Model (From Scratch)




 Licensed to Christopher Funderburk <cmfunderburk@gmail.com>
Licensed to Christopher Funderburk <cmfunderburk@gmail.com>
      Build a Large
   Language Model
     (From Scratch)
                                                    SEBASTIAN RASCHKA




                                                              MANNING
                                                              SHELTER ISLAND




Licensed to Christopher Funderburk <cmfunderburk@gmail.com>
For online information and ordering of this and other Manning books, please visit
www.manning.com. The publisher offers discounts on this book when ordered in quantity.
For more information, please contact
      Special Sales Department
      Manning Publications Co.
      20 Baldwin Road
      PO Box 761
      Shelter Island, NY 11964
      Email: orders@manning.com


©2025 by Manning Publications Co. All rights reserved.


No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in
any form or by means electronic, mechanical, photocopying, or otherwise, without prior written
permission of the publisher.


Many of the designations used by manufacturers and sellers to distinguish their products are
claimed as trademarks. Where those designations appear in the book, and Manning Publications
was aware of a trademark claim, the designations have been printed in initial caps or all caps.


Recognizing the importance of preserving what has been written, it is Manning’s policy to have
the books we publish printed on acid-free paper, and we exert our best efforts to that end.
Recognizing also our responsibility to conserve the resources of our planet, Manning books
are printed on paper that is at least 15 percent recycled and processed without the use of
elemental chlorine.

The authors and publisher have made every effort to ensure that the information in this book
was correct at press time. The authors and publisher do not assume and hereby disclaim any
liability to any party for any loss, damage, or disruption caused by errors or omissions, whether
such errors or omissions result from negligence, accident, or any other cause, or from any usage
of the information herein.

      Manning Publications Co.               Development editor: Dustin Archibald
      20 Baldwin Road                           Technical editor: David Caswell
      PO Box 761                                   Review editor: Kishor Rit
      Shelter Island, NY 11964                 Production editor: Aleksandar Dragosavljević
                                                    Copy editors: Kari Lucke and Alisa Larson
                                                     Proofreader: Mike Beady
                                           Technical proofreader: Jerry Kuch
                                                      Typesetter: Dennis Dalinnik
                                                  Cover designer: Marija Tudor


ISBN: 9781633437166
Printed in the United States of America




                        Licensed to Christopher Funderburk <cmfunderburk@gmail.com>
                                           brief contents
    1    ■   Understanding large language models              1
    2    ■   Working with text data       17
    3    ■   Coding attention mechanisms           50
    4    ■   Implementing a GPT model from scratch to
             generate text 92
    5    ■   Pretraining on unlabeled data         128
    6    ■   Fine-tuning for classification       169
    7    ■   Fine-tuning to follow instructions         204
     A   ■   Introduction to PyTorch        251
    B    ■   References and further reading 289
    C    ■   Exercise solutions     300
    D    ■   Adding bells and whistles to the training loop 313
     E   ■   Parameter-efficient fine-tuning with LoRA            322




                              v



Licensed to Christopher Funderburk <cmfunderburk@gmail.com>
Licensed to Christopher Funderburk <cmfunderburk@gmail.com>
                                                               contents
     preface xi
     acknowledgments xiii
     about this book xv
     about the author xix
     about the cover illustration   xx


1 Understanding large language models 1
   1.1 What is an LLM? 2
     1.2   Applications of LLMs 4
     1.3   Stages of building and using LLMs 5
     1.4   Introducing the transformer architecture 7
     1.5   Utilizing large datasets 10
     1.6   A closer look at the GPT architecture 12
     1.7   Building a large language model 14


2 Working with text data 17
   2.1 Understanding word embeddings 18
     2.2   Tokenizing text 21
     2.3   Converting tokens into token IDs 24
     2.4   Adding special context tokens 29



                                     vii



     Licensed to Christopher Funderburk <cmfunderburk@gmail.com>
viii                                 CONTENTS


            2.5   Byte pair encoding 33
            2.6   Data sampling with a sliding window 35
            2.7   Creating token embeddings 41
            2.8   Encoding word positions 43


       3 Coding attention mechanisms 50
          3.1 The problem with modeling long sequences 52
            3.2   Capturing data dependencies with attention
                    mechanisms 54
            3.3   Attending to different parts of the input with
                    self-attention 55
                     A simple self-attention mechanism without trainable weights          56
                     Computing attention weights for all input tokens 61
            3.4   Implementing self-attention with trainable weights                      64
                     Computing the attention weights step by step     65   ■
                                                                               Implementing a
                     compact self-attention Python class 70
            3.5   Hiding future words with causal attention                    74
                     Applying a causal attention mask 75 Masking additional
                                                              ■



                     attention weights with dropout 78 Implementing a compact
                                                          ■



                     causal attention class 80
            3.6   Extending single-head attention to multi-head
                    attention 82
                     Stacking multiple single-head attention layers    82      ■
                                                                                   Implementing
                     multi-head attention with weight splits 86


       4 Implementing a GPT model from scratch to generate text 92
           4.1 Coding an LLM architecture 93
            4.2   Normalizing activations with layer normalization 99
            4.3   Implementing a feed forward network with GELU
                    activations 105
            4.4   Adding shortcut connections 109
            4.5   Connecting attention and linear layers in a transformer
                    block 113
            4.6   Coding the GPT model 117
            4.7   Generating text 122




              Licensed to Christopher Funderburk <cmfunderburk@gmail.com>
                               CONTENTS                                         ix



5 Pretraining on unlabeled data 128
   5.1 Evaluating generative text models 129
               Using GPT to generate text 130 Calculating the text
                                                 ■



               generation loss 132 Calculating the training and validation
                                       ■



               set losses 140
      5.2   Training an LLM 146
      5.3   Decoding strategies to control randomness               151
               Temperature scaling 152 Top-k sampling
                                           ■
                                                              155
               Modifying the text generation function 157
      5.4   Loading and saving model weights in PyTorch 159
      5.5   Loading pretrained weights from OpenAI 160


6 Fine-tuning for classification 169
    6.1 Different categories of fine-tuning 170
      6.2   Preparing the dataset 172
      6.3   Creating data loaders 175
      6.4   Initializing a model with pretrained weights 181
      6.5   Adding a classification head 183
      6.6   Calculating the classification loss and accuracy 190
      6.7   Fine-tuning the model on supervised data 195
      6.8   Using the LLM as a spam classifier 200


7 Fine-tuning to follow instructions 204
    7.1 Introduction to instruction fine-tuning 205
      7.2   Preparing a dataset for supervised instruction
              fine-tuning 207
      7.3   Organizing data into training batches 211
      7.4   Creating data loaders for an instruction dataset              223
      7.5   Loading a pretrained LLM 226
      7.6   Fine-tuning the LLM on instruction data 229
      7.7   Extracting and saving responses 233
      7.8   Evaluating the fine-tuned LLM 238
      7.9   Conclusions 247
               What’s next? 247 Staying up to date in a fast-moving
                                   ■



               field 248 Final words 248
                           ■




      Licensed to Christopher Funderburk <cmfunderburk@gmail.com>
x                                   CONTENTS


    appendix A   Introduction to PyTorch 251
    appendix B   References and further reading 289
    appendix C   Exercise solutions 300
    appendix D   Adding bells and whistles to the training loop 313
    appendix E   Parameter-efficient fine-tuning with LoRA 322
                 index   337




             Licensed to Christopher Funderburk <cmfunderburk@gmail.com>
                                                                        preface
I’ve always been fascinated with language models. More than a decade ago, my jour-
ney into AI began with a statistical pattern classification class, which led to my first
independent project: developing a model and web application to detect the mood of
a song based on its lyrics.
    Fast forward to 2022, with the release of ChatGPT, large language models (LLMs)
have taken the world by storm and have revolutionized how many of us work. These
models are incredibly versatile, aiding in tasks such as checking grammar, composing
emails, summarizing lengthy documents, and much more. This is owed to their ability
to parse and generate human-like text, which is important in various fields, from cus-
tomer service to content creation, and even in more technical domains like coding
and data analysis.
     As their name implies, LLMs are “large”—very large—encompassing millions to
billions of parameters. (For comparison, using more traditional machine learning or
statistical methods, the Iris flower dataset can be classified with more than 90% accu-
racy using a small model with only two parameters.) However, despite the large size of
LLMs compared to more traditional methods, LLMs don’t have to be a black box.
    In this book, you will learn how to build an LLM one step at a time. By the end,
you will have a solid understanding of how an LLM, like the ones used in ChatGPT,
works on a fundamental level. I believe that developing confidence with each part of
the fundamental concepts and underlying code is crucial for success. This not only
helps in fixing bugs and improving performance but also enables experimentation
with new ideas.



                                       xi



          Licensed to Christopher Funderburk <cmfunderburk@gmail.com>
xii                                       PREFACE


          Several years ago, when I started working with LLMs, I had to learn how to imple-
      ment them the hard way, sifting through many research papers and incomplete code
      repositories to develop a general understanding. With this book, I hope to make
      LLMs more accessible by developing and sharing a step-by-step implementation tuto-
      rial detailing all the major components and development phases of an LLM.
           I strongly believe that the best way to understand LLMs is to code one from
      scratch—and you’ll see that this can be fun too!
          Happy reading and coding!




                  Licensed to Christopher Funderburk <cmfunderburk@gmail.com>
                                         acknowledgments
Writing a book is a significant undertaking, and I would like to express my sincere
gratitude to my wife, Liza, for her patience and support throughout this process. Her
unconditional love and constant encouragement have been absolutely essential.
     I am incredibly grateful to Daniel Kleine, whose invaluable feedback on the in-
progress chapters and code went above and beyond. With his keen eye for detail and
insightful suggestions, Daniel’s contributions have undoubtedly made this book a
smoother and more enjoyable reading experience.
     I would also like to thank the wonderful staff at Manning Publications, including
Michael Stephens, for the many productive discussions that helped shape the direc-
tion of this book, and Dustin Archibald, whose constructive feedback and guidance in
adhering to the Manning guidelines have been crucial. I also appreciate your flexibil-
ity in accommodating the unique requirements of this unconventional from-scratch
approach. A special thanks to Aleksandar Dragosavljević, Kari Lucke, and Mike Beady
for their work on the professional layouts and to Susan Honeywell and her team for
refining and polishing the graphics.
     I want to express my heartfelt gratitude to Robin Campbell and her outstanding
marketing team for their invaluable support throughout the writing process.
     Finally, I extend my thanks to the reviewers: Anandaganesh Balakrishnan, Anto
Aravinth, Ayush Bihani, Bassam Ismail, Benjamin Muskalla, Bruno Sonnino, Christian
Prokopp, Daniel Kleine, David Curran, Dibyendu Roy Chowdhury, Gary Pass, Georg
Sommer, Giovanni Alzetta, Guillermo Alcántara, Jonathan Reeves, Kunal Ghosh,
Nicolas Modrzyk, Paul Silisteanu, Raul Ciotescu, Scott Ling, Sriram Macharla, Sumit



                                       xiii



          Licensed to Christopher Funderburk <cmfunderburk@gmail.com>
xiv                                 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS


      Pal, Vahid Mirjalili, Vaijanath Rao, and Walter Reade for their thorough feedback on
      the drafts. Your keen eyes and insightful comments have been essential in improving
      the quality of this book.
         To everyone who has contributed to this journey, I am sincerely grateful. Your sup-
      port, expertise, and dedication have been instrumental in bringing this book to frui-
      tion. Thank you!




                  Licensed to Christopher Funderburk <cmfunderburk@gmail.com>
                                                 about this book
Build a Large Language Model (From Scratch) was written to help you understand and
create your own GPT-like large language models (LLMs) from the ground up. It
begins by focusing on the fundamentals of working with text data and coding atten-
tion mechanisms and then guides you through implementing a complete GPT
model from scratch. The book then covers the pretraining mechanism as well as
fine-tuning for specific tasks such as text classification and following instructions. By
the end of this book, you’ll have a deep understanding of how LLMs work and the
skills to build your own models. While the models you’ll create are smaller in scale
compared to the large foundational models, they use the same concepts and serve
as powerful educational tools to grasp the core mechanisms and techniques used in
building state-of-the-art LLMs.

Who should read this book
Build a Large Language Model (From Scratch) is for machine learning enthusiasts, engi-
neers, researchers, students, and practitioners who want to gain a deep understand-
ing of how LLMs work and learn to build their own models from scratch. Both
beginners and experienced developers will be able to use their existing skills and
knowledge to grasp the concepts and techniques used in creating LLMs.
    What sets this book apart is its comprehensive coverage of the entire process of
building LLMs, from working with datasets to implementing the model architecture,
pretraining on unlabeled data, and fine-tuning for specific tasks. As of this writing, no




                                        xv



           Licensed to Christopher Funderburk <cmfunderburk@gmail.com>
xvi                                   ABOUT THIS BOOK


      other resource provides such a complete and hands-on approach to building LLMs
      from the ground up.
          To understand the code examples in this book, you should have a solid grasp of
      Python programming. While some familiarity with machine learning, deep learning,
      and artificial intelligence can be beneficial, an extensive background in these areas is
      not required. LLMs are a unique subset of AI, so even if you’re relatively new to the
      field, you’ll be able to follow along.
          If you have some experience with deep neural networks, you may find certain con-
      cepts more familiar, as LLMs are built upon these architectures. However, proficiency
      in PyTorch is not a prerequisite. Appendix A provides a concise introduction to
      PyTorch, equipping you with the necessary skills to comprehend the code examples
      throughout the book.
          A high school–level understanding of mathematics, particularly working with vec-
      tors and matrices, can be helpful as we explore the inner workings of LLMs. Advanced
      mathematical knowledge is not necessary to grasp the key concepts and ideas pre-
      sented in this book.
          The most important prerequisite is a strong foundation in Python programming.
      With this knowledge, you’ll be well prepared to explore the fascinating world of LLMs
      and understand the concepts and code examples presented in this book.

      How this book is organized: A roadmap
      This book is designed to be read sequentially, as each chapter builds upon the con-
      cepts and techniques introduced in the previous ones. The book is divided into seven
      chapters that cover the essential aspects of LLMs and their implementation.
          Chapter 1 provides a high-level introduction to the fundamental concepts behind
      LLMs. It explores the transformer architecture, which forms the basis for LLMs such
      as those used on the ChatGPT platform.
          Chapter 2 lays out a plan for building an LLM from scratch. It covers the process of
      preparing text for LLM training, including splitting text into word and subword
      tokens, using byte pair encoding for advanced tokenization, sampling training exam-
      ples with a sliding window approach, and converting tokens into vectors that feed into
      the LLM.
          Chapter 3 focuses on the attention mechanisms used in LLMs. It introduces a basic
      self-attention framework and progresses to an enhanced self-attention mechanism.
      The chapter also covers the implementation of a causal attention module that enables
      LLMs to generate one token at a time, masking randomly selected attention weights
      with dropout to reduce overfitting and stacking multiple causal attention modules
      into a multihead attention module.
           Chapter 4 focuses on coding a GPT-like LLM that can be trained to generate
      human-like text. It covers techniques such as normalizing layer activations to stabilize
      neural network training, adding shortcut connections in deep neural networks to
      train models more effectively, implementing transformer blocks to create GPT models




                   Licensed to Christopher Funderburk <cmfunderburk@gmail.com>
                                ABOUT THIS BOOK                                     xvii


of various sizes, and computing the number of parameters and storage requirements
of GPT models.
    Chapter 5 implements the pretraining process of LLMs. It covers computing the
training and validation set losses to assess the quality of LLM-generated text, imple-
menting a training function and pretraining the LLM, saving and loading model
weights to continue training an LLM, and loading pretrained weights from OpenAI.
    Chapter 6 introduces different LLM fine-tuning approaches. It covers preparing a
dataset for text classification, modifying a pretrained LLM for fine-tuning, fine-tuning
an LLM to identify spam messages, and evaluating the accuracy of a fine-tuned LLM
classifier.
    Chapter 7 explores the instruction fine-tuning process of LLMs. It covers prepar-
ing a dataset for supervised instruction fine-tuning, organizing instruction data in
training batches, loading a pretrained LLM and fine-tuning it to follow human
instructions, extracting LLM-generated instruction responses for evaluation, and eval-
uating an instruction-fine-tuned LLM.

About the code
To make it as easy as possible to follow along, all code examples in this book are con-
veniently available on the Manning website at https://www.manning.com/books/
build-a-large-language-model-from-scratch, as well as in Jupyter notebook format on
GitHub at https://github.com/rasbt/LLMs-from-scratch. And don’t worry about get-
ting stuck—solutions to all the code exercises can be found in appendix C.
    This book contains many examples of source code both in numbered listings and
in line with normal text. In both cases, source code is formatted in a fixed-width
font like this to separate it from ordinary text.
    In many cases, the original source code has been reformatted; we’ve added line
breaks and reworked indentation to accommodate the available page space in the
book. In rare cases, even this was not enough, and listings include line-continuation
markers (➥). Additionally, comments in the source code have often been removed
from the listings when the code is described in the text. Code annotations accompany
many of the listings, highlighting important concepts.
    One of the key goals of this book is accessibility, so the code examples have been
carefully designed to run efficiently on a regular laptop, without the need for any spe-
cial hardware. But if you do have access to a GPU, certain sections provide helpful tips
on scaling up the datasets and models to take advantage of that extra power.
    Throughout the book, we’ll be using PyTorch as our go-to tensor and a deep learn-
ing library to implement LLMs from the ground up. If PyTorch is new to you, I recom-
mend you start with appendix A, which provides an in-depth introduction, complete
with setup recommendations.




          Licensed to Christopher Funderburk <cmfunderburk@gmail.com>
xviii                                   ABOUT THIS BOOK


        liveBook discussion forum
        Purchase of Build a Large Language Model (From Scratch) includes free access to live-
        Book, Manning’s online reading platform. Using liveBook’s exclusive discussion fea-
        tures, you can attach comments to the book globally or to specific sections or
        paragraphs. It’s a snap to make notes for yourself, ask and answer technical questions,
        and receive help from the author and other users. To access the forum, go to https://
        livebook.manning.com/book/build-a-large-language-model-from-scratch/discussion.
        You can also learn more about Manning’s forums and the rules of conduct at https://
        livebook.manning.com/discussion.
            Manning’s commitment to readers is to provide a venue where a meaningful dia-
        logue between individual readers and between readers and the author can take place.
        It is not a commitment to any specific amount of participation on the part of the
        author, whose contribution to the forum remains voluntary (and unpaid). We suggest
        you try asking the author some challenging questions lest his interest stray! The forum
        and the archives of previous discussions will be accessible from the publisher’s website
        as long as the book is in print.

        Other online resources
        Interested in the latest AI and LLM research trends?
            Check out my blog at https://magazine.sebastianraschka.com, where I regularly
              discusses the latest AI research with a focus on LLMs.
        Need help getting up to speed with deep learning and PyTorch?
            I offer several free courses on my website at https://sebastianraschka.com/
              teaching. These resources can help you quickly get up to speed with the latest
              techniques.
        Looking for bonus materials related to the book?
            Visit the book’s GitHub repository at https://github.com/rasbt/LLMs-from
              -scratch to find additional resources and examples to supplement your learning.




                     Licensed to Christopher Funderburk <cmfunderburk@gmail.com>
                                             about the author
                     SEBASTIAN RASCHKA, PhD, has been working in machine learn-
                     ing and AI for more than a decade. In addition to being a
                     researcher, Sebastian has a strong passion for education. He is
                     known for his bestselling books on machine learning with
                     Python and his contributions to open source.
                         Sebastian is a staff research engineer at Lightning AI, focus-
                     ing on implementing and training LLMs. Before his industry
                     experience, Sebastian was an assistant professor in the Depart-
                     ment of Statistics at the University of Wisconsin-Madison, where
he focused on deep learning research. You can learn more about Sebastian at https://
sebastianraschka.com.




                                       xix



          Licensed to Christopher Funderburk <cmfunderburk@gmail.com>
              about the cover illustration
The figure on the cover of Build a Large Language Model (From Scratch), titled “Le duch-
esse,” or “The duchess,” is taken from a book by Louis Curmer published in 1841.
Each illustration is finely drawn and colored by hand.
    In those days, it was easy to identify where people lived and what their trade or sta-
tion in life was just by their dress. Manning celebrates the inventiveness and initiative
of the computer business with book covers based on the rich diversity of regional cul-
ture centuries ago, brought back to life by pictures from collections such as this one.




                                        xx



             Licensed to Christopher Funderburk <cmfunderburk@gmail.com>
